>> In 1981, my first book,
"A New Science of Life,"
was published in England
but not in America.
And I received a letter.
I received quite
a lot of letters,
but one of the
letters I received
was from someone I'd
never heard of, Stan Grof.
I was working in India in
an agricultural research
institute, and Stan Grof wrote
me a long handwritten letter
saying how much
he liked my book,
he'd had a copy shipped to
California from England.
He was really excited about
the idea of morphic resonance,
which is what I was
describing in the book "A New
Science of Life."
And he invited me to speak at
a conference he was organizing
in Bombay for the International
Transpersonal Association
in 1982.
I think it was February 1982.
And so I wrote
back saying, well,
I appreciate the invitation,
but it's harvest season.
I've got my crops
being harvested.
It's the peak harvest season.
And I've got a major series
of experiments going on.
I can't really leave it.
And he said, well, why don't
you just come for two days,
and we'd really like to hear
about what you're saying.
So I took two days leave.
I took the overnight train
from Hyderabad to Bombay,
and I went to this conference.
And I entered a wonder
world that I'd never
encountered before.
I'd lived in the US
for years before that
when I was at
Harvard for a year,
but I'd never been
to California.
And since my time
at Harvard, I'd
been in Cambridge doing research
and teaching at the university,
and then I'd been in India for
about five years after that.
And I knew nothing about
the world of California.
I'd never heard of things
like the New Age Movement.
I'd never heard of Stan Grof.
I'd never heard of Esalen.
And suddenly, in this
room, in this hotel,
was a kind of astonishing
world of people
who are into
consciousness research,
talking about the
Esalen Institute.
Stan was talking about his
psychotropic breathing and LSD
research, and so on.
And it was a completely
new world for me,
and rather exciting, because
a lot of what I was doing
seemed to fit with
what they were doing.
And at that meeting,
which was called
Ancient Wisdom and
Modern Science,
I was talking in the
modern science part,
and Jill Purce was talking
in the ancient wisdom part,
because she'd known
Stan for some time.
And I met Jill there, and
she's, of course, now my wife.
But it was through
Stan Grof that we met,
and Stan then invited
me to go to Esalen
later that year, when I got
back from India to England.
I then went on to California.
And he was running a
month-long program at Esalen
with teachers coming
in from different--
all around the world and
with students who were there
for a whole month, including
psychotropic breathing, which
I did with him.
And I was amazed to find
myself in an environment, where
I could talk about the things
I was really most interested in
and where people were
interested in finding out
more, a kind of fizz of
excitement and discovery
and new horizons.
It was a-- and that really--
as a result of Stan, I sort
of parachuted into California.
And there, I met a lot of people
working along similar lines--
unions, researchers
in psychedelics,
consciousness
researchers, and so on.
One of the things that
interested me about Stan's work
was his emphasis on the
collective unconscious,
a kind of collective memory
on which we all draw.
And this fitted very well with
the idea of morphic resonance,
the idea that there's a
kind of collective memory
in each species.
He thought that people
in psychedelic or
psychotrophically altered
states of consciousness
were accessing this much
larger realm of consciousness
than the individual psyche.
And he gave many
examples in his workshops
and his writings
of people accessing
other forms of consciousness
beyond the human level.
Well, that made sense
to me, because I was--
I think in terms of many
forms of consciousness
in nature and also in terms
of collective memories.
And Stan had done research on
people doing LSD experiences
and also through
psychotropic breathing
and found that there were
certain archetypal patterns
that recurred in those,
including what he
called the perinatal complex--
death, the sort of squeezing,
the going through the birth
canal out into the
light, which is reflected
both in the
near-death experience
and also in many people's
psychedelic experiences.
Indeed, he wrote a book
about this sort of thing
in a series of books edited
by my wife, Jill Purce.
His book, "Near-Death
Experiences--"
I've forgotten the exact title--
it's in her Art and Imagination
Series.
So she was the editor of one of
his main books on this subject.
So Stan also had a broad
view of the possibilities
for psychology and extending
it beyond the individual level.
I mean, the very title of his
organization, the Transpersonal
Psychology Movement,
is about consciousness
beyond the human level.
And this is an area that
was, of course, totally
neglected in academic
psychology in the 20th century,
except for people who followed
in the tradition of Jung.
But Jung was concerned only
with the human collective
unconscious, whereas
Stan extended this
to other forms of consciousness
beyond the human level.
In this sense, I think he was
doing immensely pioneering work
and was very brave
to do so at a time
when these subjects
were more or less taboo.
In many ways,
consciousness studies,
as it's now developing
in the 21st century,
is carrying further some
of the lines of research
that Stan started and pioneered.
The idea of morphic resonance is
something that came to me first
in Cambridge when I was
doing research on plant
development in the 1970s.
I arrived at it through
thinking about how plants
grow their forms, how leaves and
flowers and shoots and branches
develop.
I was working at the forefront
of cell biology and plant
biochemistry, working
on the hormone, auxin,
which is one of the
most important hormones.
It's-- indole acetic acid
is its chemical name--
is related to tryptamine
and serotonin.
So I was working
on this hormone.
I was working on
plant growth, but I
realized that we were never
going to understand form
just in terms of chemicals and
diffusion gradients and gene
activations and so on, all
the standard mechanisms
that my colleagues
were intrigued by.
And I realized that
we needed a concept
of morphogenetic
fields, an idea that's
been around since the
1920s, form-shaping fields.
While I was thinking
about them, I
was wrestling with the question
of how these could be inherited
since they're not in the genes.
How could something--
a pattern, a form--
that's not in the
genes be inherited?
It took me months wrestling with
this, maybe two or three years,
before I had a sudden
flash of insight
that this could happen if
there was a sort of resonance
across time and that
organisms tapped
into a kind of
memory of form, which
I called morphic resonance.
Resonance is because of
similarity and "morphic"
to do with form or shape.
And as soon as I
had that idea, it
became clear that many
aspects of memory inheritance,
collective memory,
would make sense.
It would mean that each organism
drew upon a collective memory
of its species.
It would mean that form and
instincts in plants and animals
were inherited through
morphic resonance
rather than genes,
which is simply
code for protein synthesis.
They don't have the
capacity to underlie
most biological inheritance.
And this idea had many
implications for psychology.
So the basic idea is that
similar self-organizing
patterns of
organization influence
subsequent similar ones by
a resonance across space
and time.
There's a kind of
memory in the universe.
In its most general
form, this hypothesis
says that the laws of
nature are more like habits,
that the universe has a memory,
and there are evolving habits.
Conventional science in
the West takes the view
that the universe has
no memory, and it's
governed by eternal
laws, which are somehow
outside space and time.
That, perhaps, made
sense before 1966,
when people thought the
universe was eternal.
But we now have a radically
evolutionary cosmology starting
with the Big Bang, and
the entire universe
is now evolutionary.
So the idea that laws
of nature might evolve
may seem quite
probable, but I don't
like the idea of law
of nature, because it's
very anthropocentric.
Only humans have laws.
In fact, any civilized
humans have laws.
Habit is a much more
general metaphor,
and I think it's a better one
for the regularities of nature.
So morphic resonance
is the hypothesis
of collective memory of laws
of nature as like habits
and a transfer of information
across space and time
by a process of resonance.
And one of its more
shocking implications
is that our normal memories--
just remembering what we did
yesterday or the memories
of the habits, like
learning how to ride a bike
and drive a car, all the
skills of playing tennis--
these memories are not stored
inside the brain as material
memory traces, but depend
on resonance with ourselves
in the past.
And so individual memory
occurs, because we're
more like ourselves
than anyone else,
so we get highly specific
morphic resonance.
Collective memory is
we're like other people,
but not as similar
as to ourselves.
So we get a background
of collective memory
as well as the more sharply
focused individual memory.
And from this point of
view, these are different
in degree but not in kind.
They're two aspects of
the same phenomenon.
The usual view about the
mind is that the mind
is confined to the head.
It's nothing but the
activity of the brain.
For the materialists, who
represent the majority position
within academic
life and in science,
minds are what brains do.
They're-- it's-- the physical
activity of the brain is all
there is to it.
And memories are stored
materially inside the brain.
It's all inside the brain.
I think that's an incredibly
truncated and narrow view.
First of all, I think
we access our memories
by morphic resonance.
They're not inside the brain.
And secondly, I think that
our consciousness, our minds
are not confined to
the inside of our heads
but stretch out beyond
them through fields.
We're always-- we're all used
to the idea of magnetic fields
being inside magnets
and stretching
beyond them or the gravitational
fields of the Earth
being inside the Earth
and stretching out
into space invisibly, all
the fields of cell phones
being inside the cell phone and
stretching invisibly around it,
which is why they work.
But so far, people have
taken them deliberately
and restricted the
material view of the mind.
It must be the brain,
only there in the brain.
Well, that's such a
narrow view of matter.
I mean, physics has moved on.
All matter now has fields
associated with it,
and, of course, the brain does.
It has electromagnetic
fields you can measure
with an electroencephalograph.
But I think that the
fields of the mind
are much more extensive.
I think that they're involved
in every act of perception.
When I look at something or when
someone looks at me, the image,
I think, is not inside the
brain but where it seems to be.
So I think vision involves
light, for example,
reflected off me, going
through into a camera
or into someone's eye,
where it forms an image.
And then in our eyes, they're
inverted images in both eyes.
Then there are impulses
up the optic nerve
and changes in the brain.
The usual assumption
is this then results
in a three-dimensional full
color artificial virtual
reality display
inside our heads,
which is what we experience.
Well, I don't think
there's any reason
to suppose it's inside the head.
No one's ever seen
a virtual reality
display inside someone's head,
even during brain surgery.
I think that these
images we create
are projected out to
where they seem to be.
So when I look at a tree--
there are plenty around here--
when I look at a tree, my image
of the tree is projected out
and coincides with where
the tree actually is.
If I look at a person,
my image of them
is projected to where
they actually are.
My mind, in some sense,
touches what I'm looking at.
And I think that's why the
sense of being stared at exists,
why people can feel when they're
being looked at from behind,
and why animals can feel
when they're being looked at.
So I think the mind's extended
in every act of perception,
not confined to the brain.
And these extended
fields of the mind
are a kind of morphic
field, and the memory
involved in recognizing things
is a kind of morphic resonance.
So it's really a field
theory of the mind
and says our minds
are extended in space.
They're extended
through intentions
as well, like if I
had the intention
to ring up somebody
on the telephone,
my intention to
talk to that person
goes ahead of the phone call,
and I then get the phone
and dial it and speak to them.
But if my intention
reaches out to that person,
even if they're hundreds
or thousands of miles away,
they might start thinking of me,
and then when I ring, they say,
that's funny.
I just started
thinking about you,
and here you are on the phone.
I think that's because they're
picking up my intention.
And that's a very, very
common phenomenon, probably
the most common
telepathic phenomenon
in the modern world
happening in connection
with telephone calls.
I think that's another
manifestation of the extended
mind.
I think animals have
extended minds, too,
through visual perception
and through intention.
There's nothing
specifically human.
And so what this means is a lot
of so-called psychic phenomena
or parapsychological
phenomena are not paranormal,
which is what they're
usually called,
which means beyond the normal.
They're completely normal.
The sense of being stared at,
the thinking of someone who
then calls on the phone,
dogs and cats picking up
when their owners are
coming home telepathically--
all these things are
normal everyday occurrences
in millions of people's lives.
They're not paranormal.
They're normal.
They're not supernatural.
They're natural.
I just think they're part
of animal and human nature.
So the extended mind is not
something specifically human.
Animals have
extended minds, too.
I think it's just the way
minds work through fields.
I think many spiritual practices
have a scientific basis
and can be investigated
scientifically,
and that's the theme of my
book, "Science and Spiritual
Practices."
And there are many
kinds of ritual.
I think rituals in general,
by being done in a similar way
to the way they've
been done before,
tap in by morphic resonance to
those who've done them before,
so there's a kind of influence,
a presence of the past.
And one specific kind
of ritual or rites
of passage, which
transitions from one
stage of life to another--
the first and most
fundamental is birth itself.
Then there are rites of
passage to do from adolescence
to sexual maturity, from
being a single person to being
a married person, as there
were various initiation
rites of passage.
Most professions and
academic institutions
have like a graduation ceremony
as a kind of rite of passage.
And death is, of course,
a rite of passage.
A funeral is a rite of passage.
A person moves from one
role, being a living person,
to another.
They become an ancestor.
So one of the themes
of rites of passage
is near-death experiences.
You die to one role, and
you're born again in a new way.
And I think science
has enabled us
to know a lot more than we used
to about near-death experiences
by studying them.
Near-death
experiences, of course,
happen when people nearly die,
and lots more people nearly
die than used to.
And this has become an
increasingly common phenomenon,
owing to the fact
that modern medicine
and coronary
resuscitation have meant
a lot of people who would have
died in the past don't die now.
Their lives are saved.
And people who've had
these experiences often
report floating
out of their body,
going through a kind
of tube or tunnel,
a bit like Stan Grof's birth
canal perinatal archetype,
entering a zone of
light, peace, and joy.
And then they come back, because
it's a near-death experience.
And people who've had
these experiences often
say they've lost
the fear of death.
Their life has been
completely transformed.
They've died, and
they've been born again.
And I think that
many rites of passage
include such experiences.
One of them-- my
own interpretation
of the rite of baptism as
described in the New Testament
is just such an experience.
John the Baptist was there on
the banks of the River Jordan.
People flocked to him from
all over the Holy Land.
He baptized them
by immersing them,
total immersion in the River
Jordan, held them under,
brought them up again, and
it transformed their lives.
It did the same for Jesus.
Jesus was initiated by John the
Baptist into this experience,
and it was the
first step described
in the Bible of his
awareness of his--
when God says, "This
is my beloved son
in whom I am well
pleased," this sense
of connection with
the divine that
underlay his entire ministry.
So near-death experiences,
through rites of passage,
can be transformative,
just as they are
when they occur accidentally.
And my own view is
that John the Baptist
was inducing a near-death
experience through drowning.
It's usually interpreted as a
symbolic near-death experience
by drowning, but it'd only
take a couple of minutes
longer to have the real thing.
And then people who underwent
this experience would
say that they'd died
and been born again,
and they'd seen the light,
and their lives were changed.
And when Anabaptists revived
this practice of baptism
by total immersion
in the 16th century
as part of the ferment of
the Protestant revolution,
I think they rediscovered
this principle.
And the church is derived
from the Anabaptists,
like the Mennonites
and the Baptists.
They still retain this
form of initiation
through total immersion, death
and rebirth through drowning.
I suppose that most
modern Baptists are
very aware of
liability litigation,
and probably ministers are
very careful not to do it
for too long and
may not actually
induce very often full blown
near-death experiences.
But I suspect that John the
Baptist and the Anabaptists
in the past did do just that.
And I think it's not a
coincidence that the Baptist
churches are the ones that talk
so much about the conversion
experience, where people
undergo a complete change
in their world view
almost instantly.
And they say they've
died, and they've
been born again into the light.
And if what they're
having is this kind
of near-death experience,
that would be literally true.
And so they're often ridiculed,
especially by intellectuals
and academics and so on.
I mean, they make
fun of Baptists.
And Baptists make fun of them
by questioning evolution.
They know that it drives
professors in universities
crazy to do that.
And I think they
enjoy teasing people.
But I think that
their basic worldview
about this
transformative experience
is shaped by real near-death
experiences, at least
historically.
And there are many other
forms of rite of passage,
and I think for
many people today,
psychedelic drugs
play a similar role.
And some of them induce
near-death type experiences,
which is one of the
points that Stan Grof made
as a result of his LSD research.
I think if there are
no rites of passage,
people don't really transition
properly from one stage of life
to another.
Of course, we can't
help being born.
But there are always rites of
passage associated with birth,
like purification ceremonies
or thanksgiving ceremonies
or naming ceremonies.
Baptism, a christening, is
a traditional Christian one.
When Jesus was born,
his parents took him
to the temple, the presentation
of Christ in the temple.
It's a feast celebrated in the
Catholic and Anglican churches.
This was a rite of passage
for baby and for mother
after a birth.
And I think without
that rite of passage,
it's more likely women
would suffer from postnatal
depression and that
children wouldn't--
are less likely to be
properly recognized
by the whole extended family,
because a christening means
everyone comes together
to recognize and see
that child named.
If that doesn't happen,
then news filters out,
but there's no kind of
change in consciousness
associated with it.
And if there's no rite of
passage at adolescence,
then people
desperately need them,
so they invent very
unsuitable ones.
Gangs have rites of
passage, which often involve
acts of violence or
committing crimes,
because it's transformed the
idea of a trial by ordeal.
And if people don't have the
rite of passage of marriage,
but just live together,
then what they're doing
is entering into a perfectly
private arrangement,
whereas marriage is a
public arrangement, where
by inviting people
to the wedding,
you have a cloud
of witnesses, who
all feel part of that marriage.
It's more than something
just about two people.
It's a social institution.
And the people who
come to the wedding,
generally speaking,
especially if it's fun
and there's a nice
feast, feel very
benignly towards the people
who've gotten married,
and there's a kind of
blessing that they will give
and ongoing support from
this wider community,
whereas if it's a purely
private arrangement-- just
move in with someone
and live together-- then
that dimension isn't there.
So that's a loss, I
think, not a gain.
Some people think it
makes them more free,
but I think it
actually removes some
of the benefits of the so--
it's hard enough being married.
I think we need all the
blessings we can get.
And I think rites
of passage for death
are very important, too,
because it enables those
who are grieving to recognize
this as a kind of passage,
a transition, and it gives
a way of recognizing that
and assimilating the fact
of that person's passing
and transitioning to a
different realm of being
or non-being, if
you're an atheist.
But at least it's a
transition either way.
And again, having other
people present as witnesses
and as support makes--
this is not just a
personal individual event.
It's a social event.
And it affects very much
those who know a person well.
And so I think good funeral
services are really important.
And people who say, oh,
I don't want a funeral.
You know, just scatter the
ashes and stuff, I think it's--
they may not want to
be made a fuss of,
and it may be done
out of modesty or out
of a defiance of convention.
But for the people
left behind, I
think that these ceremonies
are really important.
And all religions
traditionally provide them,
whereas people who lose contact
with their traditional religion
or any pick and mix bits
from other religions
often don't have this regular
framework of rites of passage.
You can, of course, construct
your own and invent them all,
but that's much harder
than just fitting
into a standard pattern.
I mean, if you've lost
someone, and they've died,
you're grieving.
There's an awful lot to do.
You don't want to have to
invent a whole new ceremony.
It's much easier to have a
ready made one and people,
professionals, who
know how to conduct it.
So I'm all in favor of
sticking with traditional rites
of passage.